The Greeks, who in their gods at once declare and conceal the secret doctrine of their vision of the world, established two deities as the twinned source of all their art: Apollo and Dionysus. In the domain of art, these names represent opposing styles; nearly always entangled and entering into struggle with one another, they appear merged but once, in the blossoming of the Hellenic "Will" in the artwork of Attic tragedy. All this is to say, the human achieves the blissful feeling of existence in two states: in dreams and in intoxication. The beautiful seeming of the dream world, in which every person is the consummate artist, is the father of all the imagistic arts and, as we shall see, also a good half of poetry. We enjoy an immediate understanding of the figure; all forms speak to us; there is nothing indifferent and unnecessary. Even in our utmost experiencing of this dream-actuality, however, we have still the sensation of its seeming, shimmering through. As soon as this sensation is lost, pathological effects set in; the dream no longer refreshes and the healing power of nature halts its operation. Within these boundaries, however, it is not merely those images that are agreeable and pleasant that we-with that total comprehending-seek out within ourselves. The severe, the sorrowful, the bleak, the obscure: all are viewed with the same pleasure. It is only that the veil of seeming must remain in fluttering motion, not fully concealing the basic forms of the actual. Whereas the dream is thus the individual human's play with what is actual, the art of the image-maker (in the broader sense) is play with the dream. The statue as a block of marble is something very actual, but the actuality of the statue as dream-figure is the living person of the god. So long as the statue floats before the artist's eyes as a fantasy image, he plays still with the actual; when he translates this image into marble, he plays with the dream. In what sense, then, was Apollo able to be made the god of art? Only in his being the god of the dream-presentation. He is the "shining one" through and through, in his deepest roots the god of sun and light who reveals himself in radiance. "Beauty" is his element, eternal youth his companion. But the beautiful seeming of the dream-world is his domain, too; higher truth, the perfection of these conditions in contrast to day-to-day actuality's tattered intelligibility, elevates him to a prophesying god, but just as surely to an artificing god. The god of beautiful seeming must be at the same time the god of true cognition But that delicate limit over which the dream-image may not step if it is not to function pathologically-where seeming does not merely cheat but defrauds-must not be missing from Apollo's essential being: that modest delimitation, that freedom from the wilder impulses, that wisdom and tranquility of the image-making god. His eye must be "sunnily" tranquil; even when it glares and looks baleful, the benediction of beautiful seeming lies upon it. Conversely, Dionysian art is centered on the play with intoxication, with the state of ecstasy. There are two powers above all else that elevate the naive men of nature to the self-forgetting of intoxication: the drive of springtime and narcotic drink. Their workings are symbolized in the figure of Dionysus. In both states, the principium individuationis is sundered and the subjective disappears entirely before the erupting force of the generally human, indeed, the common-to-all, the natural. The festivals of Dionysus not only forge a union between man and man, but reconcile man and nature. The earth offers up its gifts freely, the wildest beasts approach peaceably; the flower-garlanded wagon of Dionysus is drawn by panthers and tigers. All the enclosing boundaries laid fast between persons by necessity and contingency disappear: the slave is a free man, the noble and the lowly-born unite in the same Bacchic choruses. In ever-greater throngs, the gospel of "the harmony of worlds" rolls from place to place. Singing and dancing, the human manifests himself as member of a high, more ideal commonality; he has unlearnt walking and speech. But more: he feels himself enchanted and he has actually become something other. As the animals speak and the earth gives forth milk and honey, so there sounds out from him something supernatural. He feels himself a god; what else lives only in his power of imagination, he senses now within himself. What are images and statues to him now? The human is no longer artist, but has become artwork; he is as ecstatically and exaltedly transformed as before he saw the gods transformed in dreams. The artistic force of nature, no longer that of a human, now reveals itself-a nobler clay, a more precious marble here is kneaded and hewn: the human. This human, formed by the artist Dionysus, stands in relation to nature as the statue does to the Apollonian artist. Now, if intoxication is nature's play with the human, then the Dionysian artist's creating is play with intoxication. If one has not experienced it oneself, this state can only be grasped by analogy: it is similar to dreaming and at once feeling the dream to be a dream. Just so, the servant of Dionysus must himself be intoxicated and at the same time lying in wait behind himself, observing. It is not in alternation between clarity and intoxication, but in their entanglement, that Dionysian artistry shows itself. This entanglement marks the high point of Hellenism. Originally, Apollo alone is the Hellenic god of art; it was his power that tempered Dionysus' storming out of Asia, so as to allow the most beautiful fraternal union to emerge. Here, one grasps most easily the incredible idealism of the Hellenic mode of being: out of a nature cult-which among the Orientals signified the rawest unleashing of the lowest drives, bursting for a certain time all social bonds-there grew for the Greeks a festival of world-redemption, a day of transfiguration. All the sublime drives of their mode of being reveal themselves in this idealization of the orgy. Hellenism was never in greater danger, however, than it was when the new god stormily drew near. Never, moreover, did the wisdom of the Delphine Apollo show itself in a finer light. Reluctantly at first, he wrapped his prodigious opponent in the most precious gossamer, that this other might scarce mark that he had marched halfway into captivity. Inasmuch as the Delphic priesthood grasped the new cult's profound effect on processes of social regeneration and promoted it according to their own political-religious intent, inasmuch as the Apollonian artist learned with deliberate moderation from the revolutionary art of the Bacchanalian service, inasmuch as dominion over the year in the Delphine order was ultimately divided between Apollo and Dionysus, both gods emerged as victors from their struggle, so to speak: a reconciliation upon the field of battle. If one would see quite clearly how violently the Apollonian element suppressed the irrational, supernatural aspect of Dionysus, however, one needs only to recall that, in the older musical era, the genos dithyrambikon was also the hesuchastikon. The more powerful the Apollonian artistic spirit now grew, the more freely did Dionysus, the brother-god, develop; in the time of Phidias, just as the former arrived at a completely immobile view of beauty, as it were, the latter interpreted the enigma and the horror of the world in tragedy and expressed in tragic music the innermost thoughts of nature, the weaving of the "Will" in and beyond all appearances. If music is also Apollonian art, it is, strictly speaking, only rhythm whose power of image-making was developed for representation of Apollonian states; the music of Apollo is architecture in tones, and furthermore only in the allusive tones proper to the cithara. The very element that constitutes the character of Dionysian music-indeed, of music as such-is gingerly held at a distance: the jarring force of tone and the absolutely incomparable world of harmony. The Greeks had for these the finest sensibility, as we must conclude from the rigorous character of the modes, even as the need for a fully elaborated , actually sounded harmony was much weaker among them than in the newer world. In the harmonic progression and already in its abbreviation, in so-called melody, the "Will" reveals itself quite immediately, without first having entered into some appearance . Each individuum can serve as a likeness, much as a particular case does for a general rule; conversely, the Dionysian artist would lay immediately bare the essential being  of appearances -indeed, he holds sway over the chaos of the not-yet-formed Will and, from it, can in each creative moment make a new world, but also the old, known as appearance . It is in the latter sense that he is a tragic musician. In Dionysian intoxication, in the tumultuous dash through all the scales of the soul-in narcotic excitations or in the unleashing of the drives of spring-nature expresses itself in its greatest power: it clasps individual beings together once more and lets them feel themselves as one-such that the principium individuationis appears  as something like a persistent weakness of the Will. The more dissolute the Will, the more all crumbles into individual pieces; the more self-willed the development of the individuum, the weaker the organism that it serves. In this state, something like a sentimental motion of the Will at once erupts, a "creature sigh" for what is lost-from out of the greatest pleasure sounds  the cry of deepest dismay, the yearning wail of an irreparable loss. Voluptuous nature celebrates its Saturnalia and its wakes simultaneously. The affects of its priests are intermingled in the most wondrous fashion: pain awakens pleasure, jubilation tears agonized tones from the breast. The god ho lysios has delivered everything from himself, transformed everything. The song and countenance of the masses aroused in this manner, through whom nature gained voice and movement, was for the Homeric-Greek world something entirely new and unheard-of; it was for this world something Oriental, something it had first to conquer by its own prodigious rhythmic and image-making power, just as it did the Egyptian temple style, It was the Apollonian people who cast the overwhelming force of instinct into the fetters of beauty ; they brought the most dangerous elements of nature, its wildest beasts, under beauty's yoke. We marvel most at the idealistic power of Hellenism when we compare its spiritualization of the Dionysian celebration with what emerged from that same source among other peoples. Similar festivals are age-old and can be pointed to all over the world, most famously in Babylon under the name Sacaea. Here, over the course of a five-day festival, every civil and social bond was sundered-but the center of it all was sexual licentiousness, the annihilation of all familiality through an unbounded hetaerism. The picture of the Greek celebration of Dionysus, as set down by Euripides in The Bacchae, offers the very counter-image; from it flows that same charm, the same musically transfiguring intoxication, that Skopas and Praxiteles concretized in statues. A messenger tells of being drawn up with the herds to the mountaintops in the midday heat; it is the right moment and the right place to see the hitherto unseen. Now, Pan sleeps; now, the heavens serve as dispassionate backdrop to a splendor; now, day blooms. The messenger marks three choruses of women upon an alpine meadow, lying dispersed and demurely composed upon the ground; many women are leaning against the trunks of firs-all are slumbering. Suddenly, the mother of Pentheus begins rejoicing; sleep is banished, all spring up, a model of noble customs; the girls and women let down their hair, locks falling on shoulders, and arrange their doeskins if the ribbons and bows have come undone while sleeping. They gird themselves with snakes, whose tongues lick intimately their cheeks, and several women take young wolves and deer up in arms and suckle them. All are adorned with garlands of ivy and morning glories; a blow of the thyrsus upon the rocks and water springs out, a rap with the rod upon the ground and a wine-spring rises up. Sweet honey drips from the branches; so much as touch the earth with fingertips, and snow-white milk bursts forth. -This is a wholly enchanted world; nature celebrates its festival of reconciliation with humans. The myth tells of Apollo putting back together once more the shattered Dionysus. This is the image of Dionysus created anew through Apollo, rescued from his Asiatic dismemberment. -In their perfect state, such as we encounter them already in Homer, the Greek gods are certainly not to be conceived of as born of necessity and want. Certainly, the soul who quavers with dread never dreamt up such a mode of being ; it was not in order to steer clear of life that an ingenious fantasy projected images of the gods upon the sky. A religion of life, not of duty or ascesis or ethereal spirituality, speaks out from these gods. All these figures breathe the triumph of existence; a luxurious feeling of living accompanies their cult. They do not order or demand: in them, what lies present at hand is deified, irrespective of whether it be good or evil. Measured against other religions' seriousness, holiness, and severity, the religion of the Greeks risks being undervalued as fantastical playing about -if we do not call to mind an often unrecognized move of the deepest wisdom, through which that Epicurean being of the gods appears  suddenly as the creation of a people artistic beyond compare, very nearly as the highest creation of all. It is the philosophy of the people that the forest god in his chains reveals to mortals: "Best is not to be, second-best to die quickly." It is this same philosophy that forms the background of the Greek pantheon. The Greeks knew well the horrors and outrages of existence, but cloaked them in order to go on living: a cross hidden beneath roses, in the symbol of Goethe. That luminous Olympian world came to dominance only because the grim administration of moira, which determines for Achilles an early death and for Oedipus that loathsome marriage, is to be hidden by the radiant forms of Zeus, Apollo, Hermes, and so forth. Had someone stripped that intermediary world of its artistic seeming , they would have had to heed the wisdom of the forest god, the Dionysian companion. It was out of this adversity that the artistic genius of this people created their gods. For that reason, theodicy was never a Hellenic problem; they knew better than to attribute the existence of the world-and therewith responsibility for its state-to the gods. Even the gods were submitted to ananke; this is an affirmation of the rarest wisdom. To see its existence as it actually is in a transfiguring mirror and to protect itself from the Medusa with this very mirror-this was the ingenious strategy pursued by the Hellenic "Will" in order to be able to live at all. For how else could such a people, so infinitely sensitive, so brilliant in their capacity for suffering had not been revealed to them in their gods, engulfed in a greater glory! That same drive that called art to life as the supplement and perfection of existence, that tempts men into living on, also made possible the emergence of the Olympian world, a world of beauty , of tranquility, of enjoyment. Through the operation of such a religion, life was grasped in the Homeric world as that which was in itself most worthy of struggle: life lived beneath the bright sunshine  of such gods. The p a i n of the Homeric man was bound to departure from this existence, above all to the nearness of that departure; when a complaint sounds out  at all, it resounds for "short-lived Achilles," for the rapid changing of the human race, for the disappearing of the age of heroes. It is not unworthy of the greatest heroes to yearn to live on, even as day laborers. Never has the "Will" expressed itself more openly than in Hellenism, whose very complaint is still a hymn of praise. That's why modern man longs for this era in which he believes he hears a full attunement between nature and the human; that's why "Hellenic" is the term of salvation for all those who must seek out lustrous examples for their conscious affirmation of Will. That's why, finally, the concept of "Greek cheerfulness" has arisen at the hands of hedonistic writers, such that a dilettantish life of leisure dares in disreputable fashion to excuse itself, even to honor itself, with the word "Greek." In these conceptions, erring all, from the noblest to the meanest, Hellenism is taken too crudely and simply, formed more or less in the image of nations that lack ambiguity and are, so to speak, one-sided (for instance, the Romans). All the same, one must presume a need for artistic seeming  even in the vision of the world of a people that takes care to turn all it touches to gold. Actually, as already suggested, we also encounter an extraordinary illusion within this vision of the world, the same illusion of which nature so regularly avails itself in the attainment of its goals. The true aim is concealed by a hallucination; it is toward this that we stretch out our hands, reaching nature through this deception. In the Greeks, the Will would view itself transfigured as a work of art: in order to exalt itself, its own creation would have to feel itself worthy of being exalted, would have to re-envision itself lifted up to a higher sphere-lifted up into the realm of ideality, so to speak, without this perfect world of the vision functioning as imperative or reproach. This is the sphere of beauty , in which the Greeks catch sight of their mirror images, the Olympians. With this weapon, the Hellenic Will battled that talent correlative to the artistic, the talent for suffering and for the wisdom of suffering. Out of this battle and as a monument to victory, tragedy was born. The intoxication of suffering and the beautiful dream have their distinct pantheons. The first, in the omnipotence of its being, pierces the innermost thoughts of nature; it cognizes the fearsome drive toward existence and at once the continual dying of all that enters into existence. The gods it creates are good and evil, resembling chance; they horrify with sudden intentionality, are pitiless, and take no pleasure in the beautiful. They are akin to truth and approximate the concept ; seldom do they coalesce into figures, and then with difficulty. To gaze upon them is to turn to stone; how should one live with them? But one should not-this is their lesson. The gaze must be drawn away from this pantheon-if it cannot, like a criminal secret, be hidden entirely-drawn away by the luminous dream-birth of the Olympian world nearby. Hence does the blaze of Olympus' colors heighten, the sensuality of its figures grow ever greater, the more strongly truth or its symbol asserts itself. Never, however, was the struggle between truth and beauty greater than with the invasion of the Dionysian ritual; in this ritual, nature disclosed itself and spoke of its secret with terrible clarity, with that tone against which seductive seeming  nearly lost its sway. The spring flowed up in Asia, but in Greece it became a river; it had to, for here it found for the first time what Asia could not offer it: the most excitable sensibility and capacity for suffering, coupled with the lightest deliberateness and sharp-sightedness. How did Apollo save Hellenism? The newcomer was transported up into the world of beautiful seeming , the world of Olympus; much of the honor of the most esteemed divinities, Zeus and Apollo, for example, was given over to him. Never has more trouble been taken for a stranger-and he was a fearsome stranger, too powerful enough to smash the hospitable house to pieces. A great revolution began in all forms of life: everywhere, Dionysus burst in, even into art. Beholding , the beautiful or seemly , what shines or seems : these bound the realm of Apollonian art; it is the transfigured world of the eye that creates artistically, behind closed eyelids, in the dream. It is into this dream state that the epic means to transport us; with open eyes, we should see nothing and feast on internal images-rhapsody seeks, through concepts, to incite us to the production of these images. The effects of the image-making arts are here arrived at via a detour; the image-maker leads us through hewn marble to the living god he beholds in the dream-such that the figure swimming before him as authentic telos becomes clear as much for the image-maker as for the onlooker, and the former gives the latter to follow along through the mediating figure of the statue. Meanwhile, the epic poet sees this same living figure and would also present it for the view of others, but he no longer places a statue between himself and humanity. Much more, he narrates how this figure demonstrates its life in movement, tone, word, action; he forces us to trace a host of effects back to their cause, requiring of us our own artistic composition. He has achieved his aim when we see the figure or constellation or image clearly before us, when he has imparted to us that dreamlike state in which he himself first begat these presentations. That the epic demands of us a plastic creating shows how absolutely different lyric is from epic, since lyric never has as its aim the forming of images. The commonality between the two is merely something material, the word, or even more generally, the concept; if we speak of poetry, we do not thereby have some category wherein image-making art and music would be coordinated, but have rather an agglomeration of two art media entirely differentiated in themselves, of which the one connotes a path toward image-making art and the other a path to music. Both, however, are only paths toward the making of art, not arts themselves. In this sense, painting and sculpture too are naturally only art media; authentic art is the ability to make images , regardless of whether this be making-up  or making-after . It is on this characteristic, a generally human one, that the cultural signifigance of art is based. The artist-as the one who compels motion through art media toward art-cannot be simultaneously the absorptive instrument of art's own activity. Apollonian culture's idolatry, whether expressed in temples, statues, or the Homeric epic, had the ethical demand for measure as its sublime aim, which ran parallel to the aesthetic demand for beauty. To levy a demand for measure is only possible where there is measure, where the limit is cognizable . To be able to maintain one's boundaries, one must know them: hence the Apollonian dictum, gnothi seauton. The mirror, however, in which the Apollonian Greek alone could see and thus cognize himself, was the Olympian pantheon; but here he apprehended his ownmost being  once more, shrouded in the beautiful seeming of the dream. Measure, under whose yoke the new pantheon labored (opposite the fallen world of the Titans), was the measure of beauty ; the limit within which the Greek had to hold himself was that of beautiful seeming . The innermost purpose of a culture oriented toward seeming  and measure can only be the veiling of truth: the tireless seekers in its service were hailed, just like the overthrown Titans, with the warning meden agan. In Prometheus, the Greeks were given an example of how too-great a care for human knowledge was ruinous for both the one who cared and those cared-for. He who in his wisdom would stand before the god must, like Hesiod, metron echein sophies. It was into such a constructed and artistically protected  world that the ecstatic tone of the Dionysian celebration penetrated. In this tone, nature's total immoderation was revealed: in pleasure, suffering, and cognition all at once. All that had thus far counted as limit, as measuring determination, proved itself here but artificial seeming ; "immoderation" laid itself bare as the truth. For the first time, in complete drunkenness, the demonically fascinating song of the  people trumpeted out an overpowering feeling. Against that feeling, what could the psalmodying artist of Apollo signify, with the only fearfully allusive strains of his cithara? What once had been jealously boxed and transplanted into the poetic-musical guild halls and simultaneously held at a distance from all profane participation, what had to be frozen with the force of the Apollonian genius to the level of a simple architectonics-the musical element- here cast off all constraints. Rhythmics, which before had moved in only the simplest of zigs and zags, now let loose its limbs in the Bacchanalian dance. Tone sounded out, no longer as before with wraithlike thinness, but rather with the thousandfold intensification of the masses and with the accompaniment of deep-toned wind instruments. And that greatest mystery of all transpired: harmony came here into the world, in its movement making the Will of nature immediately understood. Now, in Dionysus' surroundings, those things that had been secreted in art in the Apollonian world became clamorous; all the sheen of the Olympian gods dulled before the wisdom of Silenus. An art that spoke the truth in ecstatic intoxication banished the muses of the arts of seeming ; in the self-forgottenness  of the Dionysian state of being, the individuum-with its limits and measure-went under. A twilight of the gods stood near at hand. What was the intention of the Will, which is after all a singular o n e , in permitting the Dionysian elements to make inroads into its own Apollonian creation? A new and higher mechane of existence had come into play, the birth of tragic thought. -The ecstasy of the Dionysian state, with its annihilation of existence's customary constraints and limits, includes throughout its duration a lethargic element, in which all that is lived sinks down into the past. Through this gulf of forgottenness, the worlds of quotidian and Dionysian actuality separate from one another. As soon as that quotidian actuality once more enters into consciousness, it is felt as such with disgust: an ascetic , Will-denying disposition is the fruit of these conditions. In thought, the Dionysian is set up as a higher ordering of the world, opposite something common and base; the Greek wanted total flight from this world of guilt and fate. He did not comfort himself with a world after death; his longing rose higher, over and above the gods, denying existence all its brightly gleaming mirroring of the gods. In the consciousness of coming to from intoxication, he sees everywhere the awfulness and absurdity of human being-it disgusts him. Now, he understands the wisdom of the forest-god. Here we arrive at the most dangerous limit that the Hellenic Will, with its Apollonian-optimistic founding principle, could tolerate. Here, the Hellenic Will set to work immediately with its natural healing power, reversing that negating disposition; its means are the tragic work of art and the tragic idea. Its intent absolutely could not be to weaken, still less to suppress, the Dionysian state; direct coercion was impossible and, if it was possible, far too dangerous-for, if detained in its outpouring, the element would then break for itself some other course and infuse all the veins of life.  Above all, that disgusted thought of the awfulness and the absurdity of existence had to be transformed into presentations with which one could live: these are the sublime as the artistic taming of the awful and the ridiculous as the artistic discharge of disgust at the absurd. These two intertwining elements are unified in a work of art that imitates intoxication, that plays with intoxication. The sublime and the ridiculous go a step beyond the world of beautiful seeming, for in both concepts there is sensed a contradiction. On the other hand, in no way do these coincide with truth; they are the veiling of the truth, more transparent than beauty, it is true, but a veiling all the same. In them, therefore, we have an intermediary world between beauty and truth; here, a unification of Dionysus and Apollo is possible. This world reveals itself in play with intoxication, not in being wholly caught up in it. In the actor , we apprehend once more the Dionysian man, the instinctive poet singer dancer, but now as a play-acted Dionysian man. He seeks to attain to his model in the convulsions of sublimity or else in the convulsions of laughter; he transcends beauty and yet he does not seek truth. He remains floating in between the two. He strives not for beautiful seeming , but for seeming  nonetheless; not for truth , but for the seeming of truth . (Symbol, sign of truth.) Initially, of course, the actor was not a solitary individual; the Dionysian mass, the people, was meant to be represented-hence, the dithyrambic chorus. Through play with intoxication, the actor, along with the surrounding chorus of onlookers , was meant to be more or less  relieved of intoxication. From the standpoint of the Apollonian world, Hellenism needed to be healed and expiated; Apollo, the proper god of healing and expiation, rescued the Greeks from clear-eyed ecstasy and disgust at existence-through the artwork of tragic-comedic thought. The new world of art, the world of the sublime and the ridiculous, of "the seeming of truth" , was concerned with another vision of the gods and of the world than was that older one of beautiful seeming . Cognition of the horrors and absurdities of existence, the deranged order of things- plan-like but without reason-altogether, the most monstrous suffering in all of nature unveiled the artfully cloaked figures of moira and the Erinyes, of Medusa and the Gorgon; the Olympian gods were in the gravest danger. In tragic-comic works of art, they were saved by being themselves plunged into the sea of the sublime and the ridiculous; they ceased to be merely "beautiful," and absorbed into themselves, so to speak, that older order of gods and their sublimity. Now, they split into two groups, with but few floating in between: as sometimes sublime, sometimes ridiculous divinities. Above all, Dionysus himself was accorded this bifurcated form of being. Now, in the tragic period of Hellenism, two characters best display how it again became possible to live: Aeschylus and Sophocles. The sublime appears  to Aeschylus, as a thinker, most often in the most extraordinary justice. For him, Man and god share the tightest subjective commonality: the divine just ethical and the happy are uniformly entwined with one another. It is on these scales that the individual being, whether man or Titan,  is measured. The gods were reconstructed according to this norm of justice. So, for example, the folk belief in a demon who blinded and tempted people to guilt-a remnant of that primordial pantheon dethroned by the Olympians- was corrected, making of this demon a tool in the hands of a justly punishing Zeus. The equally primordial-likewise foreign to the Olympians-thought of a family curse was stripped of all bitterness, since with Aeschylus there is no need for individual wickedness and everyone can escape the curse. While Aeschylus finds the sublime in the sublimity of the Olympian administration of justice, Sophocles sees this-in wondrous fashion-in the sublimity of the imperviousness of the Olympian administration of justice. He recovers the folk standpoint at every point. The undeservedness of an awful fate seemed to him sublime; the truly insoluble puzzles of human existence were his tragic muse. With him, Suffering attains its transfiguration; it is conceived of as something sanctifying. The distance between the human and the divine is immeasurable; accordingly, the most profound submission and resignation are fitting. The proper virtue is sophrosyne, properly a negative virtue. Heroic humanity is the costliest humanity without this virtue; its fate demonstrates this infinite divide. There is scarcely such a thing as guilt, only a lack of cognition concerning the value of the human and its limits. This standpoint is certainly deeper and more intrinsic than that of Aeschylus, coming close to signifying the Dionysian truth and expressing it without many symbols-and yet! we apprehend here the ethical principle of Apollo braided into the Dionysian vision of the world. With Aeschylus, disgust is dissolved in the  sublime shudder at the wisdom of the ordering of the world, which is difficult to cognize only because of human weakness. With Sophocles, this shudder is grander still, because that wisdom is wholly unfathomable. This is the pure voice of piety, which is without struggle, whereas Aeschylus continually has the task of justifying the divine administration of justice and, for that reason, always remains standing before new problems. The "limit of the human," which Apollo ordered examined, is for Sophocles cognizable, but is narrower and more constrained than was meant in the pre-Dionysian era of Apollo. Human lack of self-knowledge is the Sophoclean problem, human lack of knowledge of the gods, the Aeschylian. Piety, most wondrous mask of the life-drive! Dedication to a perfected dream-world, to be awarded by the highest ethical wisdom! Flight from truth, the better to worship it from afar, shrouded in clouds! Reconciliation with actuality, because it is an enigma! Repulsion by unriddling, because we are no gods! Lustful prostration in the dirt, contentment  in ill fortune ! Highest kenosis of humanity in its highest expression! Glorification and transfiguration of existence's media of horror and terrifyingness as the very cure for existence! Joyful living in the denigration of life! Triumph of the Will in its negation! At this stage of cognition there are only two paths: that of the saint and that of the tragic artist. Both have in common that they can live on  with the clearest cognition of the nullity of existence, without feeling a rift in their vision of the world. Disgust at still living  is taken as the means of creation, whether this be saintly or artistic. The horrible  or the absurd is uplifting, because it is only seemingly  horrible or absurd. The Dionysian power of enchantment here proves itself, even at the highest point of this vision of the world; all that is actual gives way to seeming  and behind it is announced the unitary nature of the Will,wholly wrapped in the glory of wisdom and truth, in dazzling brilliance. Illusion, delusion is at its peak. -Now, it will no longer be thought incomprehensible that the very same Will that, as Apollonian, ordered the Hellenic world came to incorporate its other manifestation , the Dionysian Will. The struggle between these two manifestations of Will had an extraordinary aim: to create a higher possibility of existence and, also, to arrive in this at a still higher glorification (through art). No longer the art of seeming , but rather tragic art was the form of this glorification; in it, however, that art of seeming is entirely absorbed. Apollo and Dionysus have merged. Just as the Dionysian element infiltrated Apollonian life, as seeming  established itself as limit even here, so, too, is Dionysian-tragic art no longer "truth." No longer is this singing and dancing instinctive, natural intoxication; no longer is the mass of the chorus, Dionysically frenzied, the mass of the people, gripped unconsciously by the drive of spring. Truth is now symbolized. It avails itself of seeming, and therefore can and must also make use of the arts of seeming. Already, however, a great difference from earlier art shows itself. Now, all of seeming's artistic media  are collectively brought to bear and, furthermore, the statue is transformed, the paintings of the periactoi shifted; one and the same rear wall is presented to the eye now as a temple, now as a palace. We note also at the same time a certain indifference toward seeming , which must now surrender its immortal claims, its sovereign demands. Seeming is no longer enjoyed at all as seeming , but rather as symbol, as sign of truth. Hence the consolidation-inherently offensive-of artistic media. The clearest evidence of this disdain for seeming is the mask. The Dionysian demand is thus made of the onlooker: that he imagine everything enchanted, that he see always more than the symbol, that the entire visible world of the scene and orchestra be the realm of wonderment. But where is the force that will transport him into this disposition of belief in miracles, through which he will see all as enchanted? Who vanquishes the force of seeming and relegates it to symbol? This is music . -Philosophy in the Schopenhauerian vein teaches us to conceive of what we term "feeling" as a complex of unconscious presentations  and states of Will . The Will's aspirations, however, communicate themselves only as pleasure or displeasure and therein as merely quantitative differentiation. There are no species of pleasure, though there are certainly degrees and a welter of accompanying presentations. We must understand pleasure as gratification of the one Will, displeasure as its non-gratification. In what manner, then, does feeling impart itself? Partially, but only very partially, it can be transposed into thoughts, that is, into conscious presentations; obviously, this only holds for a portion of the accompanying presentations. There always remains in this area of feeling, however, an indissoluble remainder. Language, that is, the concept, is concerned solely with what is soluble; henceforth, the limit of "poetry" is determined by the feeling's capacity for expression. The other two sorts of imparting are instinctive through and through, without consciousness and yet functionally purposive. These are the languages of gesture and of tone. The language of gesture is comprised of generally understandable symbols and is produced through reflex movements. These symbols are visible: the eye that sees them immediately imparts the circumstances that engendered the gesture which they symbolize; for the most part, the one who sees feels a sympathetic innervation of the same parts of the face or limbs that it perceives. Symbol signifies here a quite imperfect, piecemeal likeness, an allusive sign, the particular understanding of which stands to be negotiated; it is only that in this case, the understanding common to all is instinctive, that is, it has not passed through the light of consciousness. What , then, does gesture symbolize of that dualistic being , of feeling? Clearly, it is the accompanying presentation, since only this can be alluded to through visible gesticulation, imperfectly and piecemeal: an image can only be symbolized by an image. Painting and sculpture represent humans in the gesture, that is, they imitate the symbol and achieve their effects when we understand that symbol. The pleasure of viewing  consists in understanding the symbol despite its appearance . The actor , by contrast, represents the symbol in actuality, not merely in appearance ; yet his effect on us does not arise from our understanding of this symbol. Much more, we plunge into the symbolized feeling and no longer tarry with our pleasure in appearances , with beautiful seeming . Thus, the scenery in drama does not arouse the pleasure of seeming  in the least; rather, we grasp it as a symbol and understand the actuality alluded to therewith. Mannequins and actual plants are, alongside clearly painted ones, entirely admissible as evidence that here we make present actuality , not artistic seeming . Likelihood, or the seeming of truth -and no longer beauty -is here the task. But what is beauty? - "The rose is beautiful" means only: the rose has a nice appearance ; it has something appealingly luminous about it. Nothing about its essence is meant to be communicated thereby. It appeals, it awakens pleasure as seeming : that is, through its appearing , the Will is gratified; pleasure in existence is fostered therein. The rose is- according to its appearance -a faithful likeness of its Will; or, identical to this formulation, in its seeming , it corresponds to the definition of the genus. The better it does so, the more beautiful it is; if in its very being it corresponds to that definition, then it is "good." "A beautiful painting" signifies only this: the notion that we have of a painting is here accomplished. When, however, we call a painting "good," then we designate our notion of a painting as that which accords with the essence of this painting. For the most part, however, what is understood as beautiful is a painting that represents something beautiful; this is the judgment of laypeople. They enjoy the beauty of the material, and just so are we to enjoy the image-making arts in drama, except that here the task cannot be to represent only what is beautiful: it is enough if it seems true . The object represented should be conceived of in as sensually alive a fashion as possible; it should function as truth-a requirement whose opposite is claimed for every work of beautiful seeming . - If, however, the gesture symbolizes the presentation accompanying a feeling, by what symbol are the stirrings of the Will itself to understanding to be imparted? Which is here the instinctive mediation? The mediation of tone. More precisely, it is the various manners of pleasure and displeasure- absent every accompanying presentation -that tone symbolizes. All that we could claim to be characteristic of the various sensations of displeasure are images of the presentations that become legible through the symbolism of gesture- as, for example, when we speak of a sudden shock, of the "throbbing, straining, wincing, sticking tearing biting thrill" of pain. With this, certain of the Will's "forms of intermittence" seem to be revealed: put briefly-in the symbolism of the language of tone-rhythmics. We cognize once more, in the dynamics of tone, the plenitude of the intensifications of the Will, the alternating quantity of pleasure and displeasure. But the proper being of the Will takes refuge in harmony, not allowing itself to be expressed by comparison. The Will and its symbol-harmony-both pure logic at base! While rhythmics and dynamics are up to a point still the exterior of a Will that is announced in symbols, indeed, are nearly the model of appearances as such , harmony is the symbol of the pure essence of the Will. In rhythmics and dynamics, accordingly, the individual phenomenon  is still to be characterized as an appearance ; it is from this side that music can be developed as the art of seeming . Harmony, the indissoluble remainder, speaks of the Will within and without all manifestations  and is, therefore, not merely a symbolism of feeling but rather of the world. In its sphere, the concept is entirely powerless. Now we comprehend the significance of the language of gesture and the language of tone for the Dionysian artwork. In the people's primitive spring-dithyramb, man would express himself not as individuum, but as species-man. That he ceases to be an individual man is revealed through the symbolism of the eye, expressed in the language of gesture such that he speaks as a satyr, as natural being among natural beings, in gestures and, indeed, in the intensified language of gesture, in gestures of dance. Through tone, however, he expresses the innermost thoughts of nature; it is not only as the genius of the species, as in gesture, but as the genius of existence in itself that the Will here makes itself immediately understandable. With gesture, then, the Will remains within the boundaries of the species, that is, in the world of appearances , but with tone it dissolves the world of the appearance , so to speak, into its originary unity; the world of the Maya disappears before its enchantment. But when does natural man come to the symbolism of tone? When does the language of gesture no longer suffice? When does tone become music? Above all, in the Will's highest states of pleasure and displeasure, as exultant Will or when frightened to death; in short, in the intoxication of feeling: in the scream. How much more powerful and immediate is the scream than the gaze! But even the milder excitations of the will have their tonal symbolism; in general, a tone is parallel to every gesture- to intensify the tone to pure sound falls to the intoxication of feeling alone. It is the most intimate and common mixture of a sort of gestural symbolism and tone that we call language. In the word, through tone and case, the emphasis and rhythm of its sound, the essence of the thing  is symbolized; through the gesture of the mouth, the accompanying presentation, the image, the appearance of the essence . Symbols can and must be multiple; they develop, however, instinctively and with great and wise regularity. An apprehended symbol is a concept: since in being detained in memory the tone fades entirely away, in the concept only the symbol of the accompanying presentation is retained. That which one can designate and differentiate, one has "grasped." In the intensification of feeling, the essence of the word reveals itself more clearly and sensually in the symbol of tone ; this is why it resounds  more. Sprechgesang is more or less a return to nature: the symbol that has become deadened in the course of use regains its originary power. In the arrangement of words, that is, through a chain of symbols, something new and grander is to be symbolically represented; in this capacity, rhythmics, dynamics, and harmony once more become necessary. This wider circle now rules over the more narrow one of the individual word; words must be elected, newly positioned-poetry begins. The operatic recitation of a sentence is not some sort of succession of wordsounds, for a word has only a very relative sound, since its essence, its content as represented by the symbol, varies depending on its positioning. In other words, out of the higher unity of the sentence and the essence symbolized through it, the individual symbol of the word is perpetually determined anew. A chain of concepts is a thought; this is, then, the higher unity of the accompanying presentations. The essence of the thing is out of thought's reach-that it nonetheless works upon us as a motive, as an excitation of the Will, is explicable by the fact that the thought is already an apprehended symbol for a phenomenon of Will , for the stirring and the appearance of the Will  all at once. It is as spoken, however, that is, with the symbolism of tone, that the Will works to incomparably greater and more direct effect. Sung-there it attains the high-point of its effectivity, as long as the melos is the understandable symbol of its Will; when this is not the case, the sequence of tones and the arrangement of words affect us, but the thought remains distant, a matter of indifference. Depending on whether the word is to work primarily as symbol of the accompanying presentation or as symbol of the originary stirring of the Will, whether therefore images or feelings are to be symbolized, two paths of poetry diverge: the epic and the lyric. The former leads to image-making or visual art, the latter to music; pleasure in appearances  rules over the epic, while the Will reveals itself in the lyric. That cuts loose from music, this remains in league with it. In the Dionysian dithyramb, however, the Dionysian fanatic is incited to the highest intensification of his symbolic capacity-something never-yet felt presses for expression: the annihilation of the individuatio, one-being  in the genius of the species, indeed, nature itself. Now, the essence of nature seeks expression. A new world of symbols is necessary; the accompanying presentations become symbols in images of an intensified human essence, represented with the greatest psychic energy through that entirely corporeal symbolism, through gestural dance. But the world of the Will, too, demands an unheard-of symbolic expression: the forces of harmony of dynamics of rhythmics grow suddenly tumultuous. Divided between the two worlds, poetry too requires a new sphere-at once the sensuality of the image, as in epic, and tone's intoxication of feeling, as in lyric. To apprehend this total unleashing of all the symbolic powers is the purview of that very intensification of essence that brought it about; the dithyrambic servant of Dionysus will only be understood by his peers. That's why this whole new world of art, in all its wildly foreign, seductive wondrousness, rolls through Apollonian Hellenism only with fearsome struggles.